Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And David Crews. Over the next several programs, we are
going to be talking with and about author and editor Joe Haldeman. Although he
appeared in print for the first time in 1969 with a short story in the science
fiction magazine Galaxy, Haldeman gained tremendous popularity when he came out
with his multi-award winning novel, The Forever War. The novel was serialized in
astounding science fiction, starting in 1972, then released as a book in 1974.
The Forever War is similar to Robert Heinlein's book, Starship Troopers, in that
both have intergalactic war, powered body armor, and highly advanced weapons as
common elements. Differences between the books show up in the way the authors
treat war. Heinlein's conflict was sort of a John Wayne-style battle with the
bad guys, whereas Haldeman's dealt with the emotions and reactions of his
characters to the war they fought. We asked Haldeman if the resemblance was
intentional. Well, there was no rough intention on my part. In fact, I didn't
realize until I was about 70 or 80 pages into the book that many of the details
were similar to Starship Troopers. Somebody else pointed that out when he read
the manuscript. I wasn't doing an answer to Heinlein's book. I thought
Heinlein's book was admirable in many ways, even though we have diametrically
opposed philosophies.
No, if there's any relation to any book, it is to my own first novel, War Year,
because it's an expansion into a science-fiction universe. of the notions that I
was trying to express in mainstream novel.
Haldeman has a background in physics and astronomy and told us about how he uses
his hard science background in his work.
by a real scientist's standards, it's still enough to convince me. So it's
fulfilled its function.
In the Forever War, the soldiers experience time dilation when they travel to
and from the war zone. That means that due to the tremendous velocity of their
spaceships, dozens of years have passed on Earth, while only a few months have
passed for the soldiers on the spaceships. Haldeman told us how he used hard
science to evoke some of the feeling the soldiers have. It goes deeper than just
description, the time dilation in the forever war. Though it's scientifically
accurate, its main function is metaphorical, and that is to demonstrate how the
soldiers who fight a war become isolated from the culture that they're supposed
to be protecting. using a science fictional device to exaggerate something that
happens to every soldier. I remember when I came back from Vietnam. I was
suddenly plunged into what was an alien culture, even though I'd only been a
soldier for two years. A lot of things had changed. It's not a great thing to
come back. There were no victory parades, that sort of thing.
Join us next time when we continue our interview with Joe Haldeman.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy
and here are your hosts
This is David Carson. And David Crews. Today we'll be continuing our interview
with author Joe Haldeman. It was mentioned in the previous program that Haldeman
served in Vietnam and uses that experience in some of his stories. For instance,
in one of his stories he tells of a soldier who is severely hurt by a laser
mine. We asked Haldeman if that was drawn from his own experiences. I was
wounded pretty severely in Vietnam. I was hospitalized for six months. And it
was a booby trap. I didn't set it off. Somebody else did, but it was a pretty
big one. I had over 200 separate wounds, but managed to come out of it all right
after a few months of physical therapy. So it's, yeah, I draw on that
experience. The one you're talking about is a mind of his own, but I think I've
got other short stories like The Private War of Private Jacob of the draw on
that memory. We wondered if he was exercising demons by writing about that
experience. I don't know whether I am or not. I think I'm just using available
material. I don't think the demon is too easily exercised by fiction. We asked
if being in Vietnam had any other effects on his writing. Being in the army had
an important on my writing aside from war, because I met a whole new class of
people. That is, all of my friends, while I was growing up, tended to be white
middle-class upper-middle-class kids and their successors, white middle-class
upper-class scientists so forth. It was just a mundane revelation to find that
people who came from different backgrounds still had an awful lot in common with
me. Most of the guys in my combat outfit were urban black high school or junior
high school dropouts. And I got along quite well. Haldeman has written two
novels and edited one anthology, all dealing with war, but by no means should
you consider him just a writer of war stories. That's right. He writes about
what happens to people who are placed in that type of violent situation. He
seems to be exploring what makes his characters tick more than the situation
surrounding the characters. One of the themes in his work is man or mankind
being changed when facing conflict. We asked Haldeman to respond to that. I
think it's obvious that confronting death on a daily basis changes people, and
sometimes radically for the worse, and that people who are totally dehumanized
by war. but speaking racially, I don't think you could make such a broad
statement. What's behind some of the things I'm writing is the hope that human
nature eventually may improve to the point where we won't have wars and find
other ways to settle our differences. In his novel, All My Sins Remembered, the
main character is red-taped and shuffled into doing something that he is
diametrically opposed to. When he rebels against the situation, he is
terminated. The story is about a bureaucracy that totally takes over a man's
identity and he doesn't really exist except as a tool for that bureaucracy. When
he becomes an efficient tool, he's scrapped. The main character ends up being a
spy for the government and carrying out covert operations for them. And he does
them more or less against his will That is to say, through very advanced
techniques of conditioning, he's turned into a thoroughly different person. He
was a Buddhist, a pacifist when he started out. They did not get the job he
signed up for. They twisted him around into being a killing machine. If all this
makes Haldeman sound like a pessimist, well, he's not that either. Join us next
time when we find out more about Joe Haldeman.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy
and here are your hosts
This is David Carson and David Crews. Today we continue our interview with author
Joe Haldeman. So far in our conversation with Haldeman, we've discussed how he
used his experiences in Vietnam in his writing and some of his early works. Now
we're going to look at his writing style in two particular stories, a short
story to Howard Hughes' A Modest Proposal and a novel, Mindbridge. Haldeman
tells these stories by using narratives by the main characters in the stories,
reports by them and others, portions of books written long after the time set in
the story, and other non-standard writing techniques. We asked him if he got the
ideas for this type of style when he was attending the Iowa Writers' Conference.
Oh, not really. The connection is with John dos Passos, actually. I read the USA
trilogy some years before I wrote Mind Bridge. and really was impressed by the
way it worked and thought it would work really well in science fiction. So I
tried it out in a rather long short story to Howard Hughes, A Modest Proposal,
and it looked like it would work, so I went ahead and applied it to MindBridge.
I did do most of that book while I was studying at Iowa, and that's why I did
the occasion. The authors at the Iowa Writers Conference were, for the most
part, not science fiction writers. We asked Haldemann about their reaction to
his being a science fiction author. Well, they were a little apprehensive about
it. See, they didn't know I was a science fiction writer when I joined the
workshop. So I joined on the basis of my first novel, which was not science
fiction. And some of them were outwardly hostile towards science fiction, such
as Stanley Elkham. Others were anywhere between apprehensive and slightly
sympathetic. Stephen Becker, one of them, had actually had a few pieces in the
magazine Fantasy and Science Fiction. In general, though, they thinly disguised
the attitude that this stuff was just commercial fiction and therefore beneath
contempt. That's an attitude I've never understood. some of the world's finest
literature is science fiction. We asked Haldeman what he thought about that type
of attitude. But the field is judged by its worst, not by its best. And people
like that think of science fiction, they think in terms of grade B movies and
lousy television. They've never read much of the best of the field.
Using science fiction, it's possible to consider various aspects of mankind's
future, and science fiction is the only literary form to speculate about the
future. We asked Haldeman if he thought that mankind might be radically
different in the future. I think it's quite possible, even, say, within the span
of a century. So many of the things that determine human nature are things that
can be mitigated by technology, such as the problem of dying so soon, that it's
possible that we'll, in a couple of generations, be able to live a century, two
centuries, maybe a thousand years, maybe as long as we care to. That will
radically change human nature because it will take the pressure off of
individuals.
there are other less tango notions it's possible that sciences and communication
will grow into a kind of sophisticated mind control where it will be difficult
for the individual to know exactly what is his idea and what has been induced by
his own society sort of a sophisticated lifelong brainwashing It doesn't seem
too unlikely, if you can argue that it's set now. Join us next time when we wrap
up our interview with Joe Haldeman and find out how he got involved with Star
Trek.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And David Crews. And today we're going to wrap up our
interview with author Joe Haldeman. Haldeman has been involved in two multi-book
series, one called Attar the Merman, and the other was Star Trek from the TV
series, Although he enjoyed writing the first of his three Attar books, the ones
that followed had nowhere to go to expand the characters. The publisher was
banking on the current popularity of dolphins and whales, but the series never
took hold and Haldeman's third book was never published. The Star Trek novels
were a different sort of challenge, as Haldeman explains. Well, it was just
being in the right place at the right time in a way. You know, Jim Blish was
doing the series of these things, and I knew they were quite financially
successful. And when Jim died, I was in correspondence with Fred Pohl, who was
his editor there. And I just, you know, apologized for being like a vulture
circling over the corpse, but I asked whether anybody was picking up Jim's work.
And he said, Why don't you get it a try? Well, Jim was taking the script from
the TV show and just turning them into short stories, whereas they wanted me to
do what Jim would have done if he had lived, which was write original novels
around the Star Trek characters. Writing these novels was more than just sitting
down and coming up with something for Spock, McCoy, and Kirk to do. Haldeman had
to work out some other problems first. That was sort of cute, though. Writing
the first one, I had fun because I'd been in the service during most of Star
Trek. And so I had to treat it as a research project. And I went and saw the TV
show every afternoon, and then I read all the books and made charts and things
like that and sat down and wrote the books. That was an odd thing. I had to sign
a two-bulb contract. I found the first one very interesting and fond to write.
The second one was quite difficult to write. The first one took three months,
and the second took nine. One of Haldeman's latest projects is a trilogy, of
which the first book, Worlds, is already out. Haldeman gave us a little
background on that novel. Well, it starts out about a century from now, and it's
essentially the story of a woman who grew up, was born and grew up on a space
colony, a space settlement, and is sent to Earth for a year of postgraduate
work, or finishing if you want to call it that being set up for a political
position as a liaison between this world and earth and various strange things
happen to her in the year that she's here it's sort of a old kind of a novel she
grows by being sort of bounced around by Earth and the second novel Stars takes
over where the first one ends and takes her into old age. It seems as if a lot
of authors are writing trilogies these days, and we wondered why Haldeman
decided to write one. Well, it seemed like an awfully big thing to put into one
book. And it looks as if each one of the trilogy, each volume of the trilogy,
will be longer than any other book I've ever written by at least a third in each
month. So indeed, it would have done a book nearly a half million words long. It
would have been difficult to sell. And I just, you know, everybody's doing
trilogies, so why can't I do a trilogy, too, as part of it? They're very
successful. The second or third books have a built-in audience.
also i wanted to try something big and that's as good a reason as any we've
discussed in the previous sections of this interview that haldeman's main
concern is storytelling he develops interesting characters and sets them in a
believable scientific background
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Good night. Thank you.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show. A commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. What makes science fiction a separate
branch of literature? Why is it distinct from so-called mainstream or regular
literature? And should it be? We asked science fiction author Jack Chalker if
mainstream writing and science fiction are essentially different. No, they
aren't. There's no way that you can. It is rather odd, though. It's an
ambivalent answer. Clifford Sumac once said that there is some difference
because science fiction writers you will find writing every other form of
literature mysteries, romances, mainstream war novels you name it but when
people who write other things try and write science fiction they usually fall
flat on their face but there really isn't that much difference an awful lot of
people write an awful lot of stuff And a great deal of it is science fiction and
fantasy, whether or not it's categorized that way.
The ghettoization of it is strictly a marketing thing. Another science fiction
figure, Frederik Pohl, who's been an editor, agent, and writer, and knows the
field, as few other people do, agrees that it's the publishing industry that
keeps science fiction separate. well the publishing industry is responsible for
that and in some ways it's a bad thing a lot of people in this world like to
read books but are prejudiced against anything that has the word science fiction
on it as i think it's um i've forgotten the person who wrote the poem a little
poem about it which says something like if it's science fiction i don't like it
and if i it, it can't possibly be science fiction, because there are a great
many science fiction novels that everybody loves. They just don't admit they're
science fiction. Brave New World in 1984.
But I don't mind that. I'm perfectly willing to have the word science fiction on
the cover of any book I write. It's only a sort of geographical designation.
It's the name they put on the shelves where the books appear that the people who
like to write, read my books are going to go. Jack Williamson has been writing
science fiction for well over half a century, and he shares Pohl's pride in being
recognized not just as a writer, but as a science fiction writer. I'm not
enthusiastic about
consolidating mainstream literature and science fiction, but I also remember
that there was a time when science fiction wasn't walled off in a category by
itself and I don't think there's any reason it should be when Wells was
publishing his stories they were just novels or romances or whatever and the
science fiction was in a sort of ghetto quote ghetto for a generation I think
this was partly due to the fact that it was published in pulp magazines and
people looked down on the pulps I think we're sort of getting over that, but
it's still a category, a publisher's category, like westerns or gothics or love
romances or whatever. And that means that if Don Wilhelm or Judy-Lynn Del Rey or
someone else packages a book in a recognizable science fiction package, it'll
sell enough copies to make a profit. But it's a sort of limited profit because
it is shelled in the science fiction recs and the stands, and the general public
doesn't see it. So people who get to be best sellers successful—people like
Vonnegut and so
forth—tend to want to get the science fiction label off their stories when they
begin to sell enough copies. But I've never reached that stage myself. I'm proud
to have mine called science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.